--- PAGE 1 ---
Multi-hop Reasoning in Neural, Symbolic, and
Hybrid Models
Sankalp B C 1†, Sk Abdur Razaaq 1†, Vathsala H 2*†,
Dinesh Naik 1†, Ch. Janaki 2†, Sathyanarayana K B 1†,
S D Sudarsan 2†
1Department of Information Technology, National Institute of
Technology, Surathkal, Mangalore, 575025, Karnataka, India.
2Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), Bangalore,
560036, Karnataka, India.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): vathsalah@cdac.in;
Contributing authors: sankalpbeerappa.253it002@nitk.edu.in;
skabdurrazzaq.253it001@nitk.edu.in; din nk@nitk.edu.in;
janaki@cdac.in; sathyanarayanakb.2375036@nitk.edu.in; sds@cdac.in;
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Imagine a situation where an automated eligibility system has to determine
whether a claimant is the legal heir of a deceased person, by proving that the
claimant’s father’s mother is the deceased person’s sister. To reach this conclu-
sion, the system must sequentially link three independently stated facts. This
capacity is referred to as “multi-hop reasoning,” and it continues to be a major
obstacle for artificial intelligence (AI). AI’s reasoning accuracy declines dras-
tically as the reasoning chain expands in multi hop statements. Modern AI
language models are excellent at pattern recognition, however, it lacks system-
atic thinking. Although classical rule-based systems provide logical accuracy,
they cannot handle the ambiguity of natural language. Thus, current systems
are unsuited for high-stakes deployment, as no existing approach simultaneously
guarantees logical consistency, compositional generalization, and human-readable
explanations over arbitrary reasoning depths. This work proposes a modular
neural-symbolic architecture calledHybrid Reasoner. It uses a refined Bidirec-
tional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) model that extracts
structured facts from natural language, and also employs deterministic First-
Order Logic (FOL) engine for forward chaining over Horn clauses, this ensures
connecting the facts into guaranteed, step-by-step conclusions making inference
formally tractable. A confidence-based orchestrator is employed to select between
1

--- PAGE 2 ---
the results of symbolic path and the neural module. The proposed model is
assessed using the Compositional Language Understanding and Text-based Rela-
tional Reasoning (CLUTRR) benchmark dataset. The dataset covers 18 different
types of kinship relations with two to ten hops inference chains. The model is
evaluated by accuracy, Macro/Micro F1, and logical consistency; the proposed
model,Hybrid Reasonerachieves exceptional logical consistency and accu-
racy on symbolically tractable queries, it exhibits nearly constant performance
across all reasoning depths, establishing a tangible step toward reliable and
understandable AI.
Keywords:Neural-Symbolic AI, Multi-hop Reasoning, Relational Inference,
First-Order Logic, Explainable AI, Hybrid Reasoning
1 Introduction
In order to establish legal kinship for inheritance purposes and determine that a
claimant’s father’s mother is the deceased’s sister, an automated reasoning system
must chain three independently stated facts sequentially without explicitly stating
the conclusion in a single sentence. A wide range of significant real-world tasks,
such as determining kinship-based legal eligibility, resolving hereditary medical risk
across generations, validating automated genealogical records, and assisting clinical
decision systems that track familial disease patterns, rely on this ability, known as
multi-hop reasoning. Building systems that can consistently connect facts across
numerous inference steps—the way a human expert does with ease—remains a chal-
lenge despite notable advancements in artificial intelligence (AI). This is still one of
the most enduring unresolved issues in the domain of computing.
There are two different paradigms for solving this issue. Symbolic AI systems
may generalize arbitrarily deep inference chains without experiencing performance
deterioration since they are based on formal logic and rule-based inference, thereby
attaining perfect logical consistency [1]. Transparent, auditable reasoning traces are
produced by learning-based extensions like Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) [1]
and classical logic programming systems. However, they need hand-crafted rule sets
that do not scale elegantly for open-domain input and are infamously brittle when
faced with the noise, paraphrasing variety, and pronoun ambiguity inherent in spoken
language.
In contrast, neural techniques are remarkably flexible when it comes to handling
linguistic variety. Transformer-based models that perform well on language under-
standing tasks include BERT [2], Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [3], and Relation
Networks [4]. Nevertheless, their accuracy drastically declines as reasoning depth
increases—from 95.2% at 2 hops to 62.1% at more than 7 hops on the CLUTRR bench-
mark [5]—and they mostly depend on statistical pattern matching rather than explicit
logical deduction [6, 7]. Their distributed internal representations are not suitable for
meaningful post-training interpretation [8, 9], and they produce logically inconsistent
outputs under changes in input distribution, achieving only 73.2% logical consistency.
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
There have been studies that have combined both paradigms, thereby comple-
menting each other in overcoming their respective drawbacks. This approach has been
called the neuro-symbolic approach. Previous attempts at neural-symbolic integration
include, Knowledge-Based Artificial Neural Networks (KBANN) [10] initialize neural
architectures from symbolic structures, however, the interpretability of these struc-
tures degrades as fine-tuning proceeds. While DeepProbLog [12] and Neural Theorem
Provers (NTPs) [11] render inference differentiable, they forfeit the clear, deterministic
nature of traditional logical reasoning. No current method, without imposing differen-
tiability on the logical component, is able to simultaneously ensure logical consistency,
compositional generalization over arbitrary reasoning depths, and human-readable
proof traces. This three-way gap restricts deployment in high-stakes situations where
auditability and correctness are strict requirements.
In order to close this gap, the current work suggests a modular neural-symbolic
design calledHybrid Reasoner, which treats the two paradigms as complementary
experts rather than rivals. The perception module is a refined BERT encoder that
extracts structured relational facts from natural language narratives. Then, a deter-
ministic First-Order Logic (FOL) engine employs forward chaining over Horn clauses,
this chains the facts into assured, sequential conclusions, generating human-readable
proof traces, for each question that is answered. Both modules are coordinated by a
confidence-based orchestrator, which only activates the neural module when language
comprehension is required and routes each query to the symbolic engine.
This rigorous architectural division is the fundamental innovation of Hybrid Rea-
soner: neural perception handles the fuzzy, high-variance task of natural language
understanding, while symbolic reasoning handles the crisp, depth-invariant task of
logical inference—each functioning only in the regime where it is most dependable. A
web-based interface (Fig. 2) has been created to show the practical accessibility of this
architecture. Hybrid Reasoner takes a relational query and a natural language con-
text narrative, invokes the entire hybrid inference pipeline, and returns a relationship
prediction with its supporting proof trace in real time.
The CLUTRR benchmark [5], a compositional generalization testbed containing
18 kinship connection types over inference chains of 2 to 10 hops, is used to assess all
three paradigms: neural-only, symbolic-only, and hybrid. Accuracy, Macro F1, Micro
F1, and logical consistency are used as assessment criteria to gauge performance.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 surveys related work across
neural, symbolic, and hybrid reasoning paradigms. Section 3 presents the Hybrid Rea-
soner architecture in detail. Section 4 reports experimental evaluation on the CLUTRR
benchmark. Section 5 discusses strengths, limitations, and comparisons. Section 6
concludes with directions for future work.
2 Related Work
The objective of developing systems that can think like humans has driven decades of
research in the fields of languages, logic, and machine learning. This section traces the
intellectual journey from early neural architectures to symbolic systems and, finally,
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
hybrid paradigms, highlighting how each line of work advanced the field and uncovered
new limitations that motivate the present study.
2.1 Neural Approaches to Relational Reasoning
Early attempts to use neural architectures for relational reasoning investigated graph-
structured message transmission using GNNs [3] and explicit pairwise comparisons
using Relation Networks [4]. Both had potential in completing knowledge graphs
and responding to relational questions, however, reasoning was still based on learned
embeddings rather than explicit logical rules, which led to poor performance when
test-time structural patterns differed from training-time ones.
Marcus [7] argued that statistical pattern matching cannot take the place of rule-
based reasoning in tasks requiring logical consistency across multiple inference steps.
Lake and Baroni [6] showed that sequence-to-sequence networks fail to generalize
compositionally even when constituent operations are individually mastered. These
theoretical concerns are experimentally supported by the CLUTRR benchmark [5],
where neural accuracy on 7-hop chains drops drastically compared to 2-hop chains [5].
While Ribeiro et al. [9] formalized this fragility by demonstrating that neural clas-
sifiers frequently violate logical constraints under input paraphrasing. Lipton [8] noted
that distributed representations resist meaningful post-hoc interpretation, limiting
trust and debuggability.
All these findings highlight the necessity for a method that preserves logical
coherence and produces inference traces that are understandable by humans without
sacrificing the linguistic robustness that neural encoders provide.
2.2 Symbolic and Logic-Based Approaches
Symbolic AI addresses the explainability and consistency issues in neural models. It
represents information as explicit facts and rules. These are governed by well-defined
inference procedures. By design, Prolog, Datalog, and other classical logic program-
ming systems ensure perfect logical consistency and generalize across deep inference
chains without performance degradation [1]. However, they are infamously brittle when
confronted with the noise, ambiguity, and paraphrasing variety of actual language
input, and thus need manually created rule sets.
Although Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) [1] attempts to close this gap by
producing transparent and provably sound symbolic generalizations, it is unable to
handle continuous representations needed by contemporary natural language process-
ing, it scales poorly to large datasets. Although this continuous relaxation reintroduces
the very opacity that the symbolic technique was meant to prevent, Evans and Grefen-
stette [13] developed∂ILP, a differentiable relaxation that permits end-to-end rule
learning. Although they provide structured symbolic databases, knowledge graphs such
as Freebase and Wikidata are inherently unfinished, need significant manual curation,
and are unable to accept fresh textual input. These disadvantages collectively define
the gap that the suggested hybrid approach fills: fragility at the natural language
perception stage despite consistent logical correctness over structured input.
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
2.3 Neural-Symbolic Integration
Since neural and symbolic techniques are complementary in their strengths, more and
more research has attempted to merge them. By initializing network weights using
symbolic knowledge, KBANN [10] showed that logical structure may guide neural
learning; however, once fine-tuning begins, the resultant network loses its symbolic
interpretability. By characterizing proofs as soft operations over learned embeddings,
NTPs [11] made logical inference differentiable. This approach enabled end-to-end
optimization; however, it incurred high computational cost and did not yield human-
interpretable rule representations.
In order to accommodate perception-level inputs, DeepProbLog [12] extended
probabilistic logic programming with neural predicates. However, it demands logic pro-
gramming expertise and is difficult to debug when probabilistic and neural components
combine. First-order logic is grounded in continuous tensor spaces via Logic Tensor
Networks (LTNs) [14], allowing gradient-based learning at the expense of the clear,
deterministic character of traditional logical inference. Such continuous relaxations are
unsuited for applications where perfect logical correctness is a strict necessity.
2.4 Research Gaps and Positioning
A distinct pattern emerges when previous methods are compared, the three essen-
tial requirements for practical implementation are: compositional generalization across
arbitrary reasoning depths, logical consistency guarantee, and human-interpretable
explainability. Differentiable neural-symbolic hybrids sacrifice interpretability in the
quest for end-to-end optimisability; fully symbolic models provide depth-invariant rea-
soning and explainability however, they collapse at the natural language perception
stage; and purely neural models manage linguistic variation however, they are unable
to guarantee logical consistency or generalise beyond their training distribution. No
prior method satisfies all three criteria at once.
These failures are confirmed to be systemic by the CLUTRR benchmark [5], where
neural accuracy decreases from 95.2% at 2 hops to 62.1% at more than 7 hops (Table 4).
Logic-only approaches are also insufficient since real-world text includes pronoun
anaphora, paraphrasing variation, and multi-word entity names that fixed rule gram-
mars cannot handle. Rather than making logic differentiable and compromising its
interpretability,Hybrid Reasonertreats a Horn-clause engine and a BERT encoder
as complementary specialists using a confidence-based orchestrator (Algorithm 3). The
CLUTRR benchmark is used as a rigorous testbed to validate this approach.
The primary contributions of this work are as follows:
• A symbolic reasoning engine is developed that uses forward chaining and First-
Order Logic to carry out multi-hop relational inference, storing 47 inference rules
that spans the kinship connection seen in CLUTRR data set.
• A neural reasoning module is constructed by fine-tuning BERT [2] on the CLUTRR
dataset [5] for relational pattern extraction from natural language text.
• A hybrid neural-symbolic architecture calledHybrid Reasoneris developed.
It achieves assured logical consistency on all symbolically tractable questions by
integrating both modules through a confidence-based orchestration method.
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
• TheHybrid Reasoneris evaluated using the CLUTRR dataset.
3 Methodology
Multi-hop relational reasoning has two challenges: one is, formal rule parsers are
challenged by natural language inputs that are ambiguous, paraphrase-rich, and
pronoun-laden; and another is, statistical pattern matchers are challenged by reason-
ing chains that are arbitrarily deep and must maintain logical consistency. Symbolic
models impose logic, however, they cannot handle flexible language, while neural mod-
els identify linguistic patterns, however, they lack logical structure. This shows neither
paradigm is adequate on its own; In the proposed Hybrid Reasoner, each paradigm
is assigned to the domain it handles most effectively: symbolic components perform
logical inference, while neural components handle language perception. This com-
plementary design addresses the limitations of both approaches. Fig. 1 depicts the
architecture of the proposed Hybrid Reasoner, it is made up of three main components
and the following subsections explains them in detail.
3.1 Neural Reasoning Module
Perceptual processing is handled by the neural module, it uses a relational query and
narrative as input to determine answer(kinship link) based on the narrative. The neu-
ral model is based on BERT [2], the most extensively tested Transformer encoder for
relational classification. Richer contextual dependencies are captured by BERT’s bidi-
rectional attention throughout the entire input, in contrast to unidirectional models
like Embeddings from Language Models(ELMo) or Generative Pre-trained Trans-
former(GPT). This is crucial when the question subject and object appear at separate
narrative points.
For each relational reasoning instance, a storyS(a sequence of sentences describing
kinship relationships) and a queryQ(a question about the relationship between two
named individuals) are concatenated with special tokens following the BERT input
format [2]:
Input = [CLS]⊕S⊕[SEP]⊕Q⊕[SEP] (1)
where⊕denotes sequence concatenation. The[CLS]token’s final hidden state
is used for classification; the[SEP]tokens separate the story from the query and
mark the end of the sequence. WordPiece tokenization with a vocabulary of 30,522
tokens handles out-of-vocabulary terms by decomposing them into the longest known
subword units, ensuring rare proper nouns (e.g., “Cronus”, “Nirmala”) are tokenised
rather than discarded.
3.1.1 Self-Attention Mechanism
The architectural core of BERT is the multi-head self-attention mechanism. Self-
attention allows every token in the input sequence to attend to every other token
simultaneously, enabling the model to capture long-range dependencies without the
sequential bottleneck of recurrent networks. For an input sequence ofntokens rep-
resented as a matrixX∈R n×dmodel, three projection matrices produce queries (Q),
keys (K), and values (V) through learned linear transformations:
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
Fig. 1System architecture for Hybrid Reasoner. The Symbolic Reasoner (left) uses regex-based fact
extraction and a Horn-clause inference engine [1]; the Neural Reasoner (right) uses a BERT encoder
with a classification head [2]. The Hybrid Orchestrator (Algorithm 3) selects the final prediction by
combining both modules’ outputs based on confidence.
Q=XW Q (2)
K=XW K (3)
V=XW V (4)
whereW Q, W K, W V ∈R dmodel×dk are learned parameter matrices.d model = 768
it is a design choice and is obtained by the product of Number of headsh= 12
and Per-head dimensiond k = 64. The attention output is computed as a scaled dot-
product [16]:
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax
 QK T
√dk

V(5)
Dot products between high-dimensional query and key vectors are prevented from
pushing softmax into low-gradient areas, which delays or destabilizes learning, via the
scaling factor 1√dk
. In accordance with Devlin et al. [2], this study usesd k = 64 and
h= 12 heads.
Multi-head attention runshsuch attention operations in parallel, each learning to
attend to different aspects of the input (e.g., syntactic subjects, relational predicates,
object arguments) [16, 17]:
MultiHead(Q, K, V) = Concat(head 1, . . . , headh)W O (6)
where eachhead i = Attention(QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i ) andW O is a learned output
projection. The concatenation of 12 attention heads allows the model to jointly repre-
sent both local syntactic context and global discourse-level relational patterns, which
are both necessary for reliably extracting kinship facts from multi-sentence narratives.
3.1.2 Pre-training and Fine-tuning
BERT [2] is used to achieve two goals. In Masked Language Modeling (MLM), 15% of
tokens are masked and predicted from bidirectional context, encoding rich semantic
representations. Next Sentence Prediction (NSP) uses segment sequentiality prediction
to learn inter-sentence coherence, which is directly related to monitoring relational
facts throughout a CLUTRR narratives.
For Hybrid Reasoner, the pre-trained BERT encoder is fine-tuned for the CLUTRR
kinship classification task by appending a linear classification head. The[CLS]token
representationh [CLS] ∈R 768, produced by the final encoder layer, serves as a com-
pressed summary of the entire input and is passed through a classification head to
produce a probability distribution over the 18 relationship classes.
P(y|x) = softmax(W·h [CLS] +b) (7)
whereW∈R 18×768 is the weight matrix of the classification head andb∈R 18
is the bias vector, both learned during fine-tuning. A dropout layer withp= 0.3 is
applied toh [CLS] before the linear projection to prevent overfitting on the relatively
small CLUTRR training set of 10,000 examples. The entire model (BERT encoder +
classification head) is fine-tuned end-to-end using the AdamW optimiser [15], which
decouples weight decay from the gradient update to improve generalisation.
3.1.3 Loss Function
The classification head is trained by minimising cross-entropy loss over theNtraining
examples andC= 18 classes [18]:
L=− 1
N
NX
i=1
CX
c=1
yi,c log(ˆyi,c) (8)
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
T able 1Neural module training
hyperparameters. Values follow the
recommendations of Devlin et al. [2]
and Loshchilov and Hutter [15]
Hyperparameter Value
Learning Rate 2×10 −5
Batch Size 16
Epochs 5
Weight Decay 0.01
Warmup Steps 500
Max Sequence Length 128
Dropout 0.3
wherey i,c ∈ {0,1}is the one-hot ground-truth label for exampleiand classc, and
ˆyi,c ∈(0,1) is the corresponding predicted probability from the softmax output. Cross-
entropy loss penalises confident wrong predictions more severely than uncertain ones,
which is important here because confident, yet logically inconsistent predictions—a
known failure mode of neural classifiers under distributional shift [9]—are precisely
the errors that the hybrid orchestrator must detect and override.
3.1.4 Neural Module Implementation
The neural module employs BERT-base-uncased model [2]; the uncased version works
well with the irregular mixing of proper and common noun capitalization in CLUTRR
narratives. Each instance of narrative and query is concatenated Using[CLS]and
[SEP]tokens, either padded or truncated to 128 tokens, this covers approximately
95% of CLUTRR cases without truncation. A linear classification head (R 768 →R 18)
with dropout (p= 0.3) is appended. AdamW [15] is used for training with a 500-step
linear warmup, linear decay, FP16 precision, gradient clipping at norm 1.0, and early
stopping with a patience of three epochs is employed.
3.2 Symbolic Reasoning Framework
The logical foundation of Hybrid Reasoner is formed by the symbolic module, which
uses deterministic inference and organized facts to provide auditable, logically sound
reasoning. It employs four components—a fact extraction parser, a knowledge graph,
Horn clause inference rules, and a forward chaining engine—to infer family connections
from plain language. It is based on First-Order Logic (FOL) with forward chaining
over Horn clauses.
3.2.1 Knowledge Representation and Knowledge Graph
Structured knowledge in the symbolic module is organised as aknowledge graph: a
directed graphG= (E, R, T) in whichEis a set of entity nodes (named individuals
in the narrative),Ris a set of relation types (the 18 kinship predicates), andTis a
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
set of triples (s, r, o)∈E×R×Eencoding that subject entitysstands in relationr
to object entityo. In the CLUTRR kinship domain, a triple (s, r, o) is written in FOL
predicate form as:
r(s, o) (9)
For example, the statement “Zeus is the father of Hercules” is stored in the knowl-
edge graph as a triple (Zeus,father,Hercules), equivalently written as the FOL atom
Father(Zeus,Hercules). The 18 relation types correspond directly to the 18 output
classes of the BERT classification head (Table 2), ensuring that the symbolic and
neural modules share the same relational vocabulary.
The knowledge graph provides three essential features, in contrast to the opaque
weight matrices of the neural module:compositionality(new facts arise by chaining
edges over intermediate nodes),interpretability(each fact has a human-readable
provenance), andlogical consistency(each derived triple comes from a valid
inference rule).
3.2.2 Horn Clause Rules
The inference rules of the symbolic module are expressed as Horn clauses, a restricted
fragment of First-Order Logic that admits efficient, deterministic inference. A Horn
clause is an implication with a conjunction of positive literals as the body (antecedent)
and a single positive literal as the head (consequent):
P1(x1, x2)∧P 2(x2, x3)∧ · · · ∧P n(xn−1, xn) =⇒Q(x 1, xn) (10)
Kinship composition is accurately captured by Horn clauses, which produce a single
derived relation from a series of binary relational facts over intermediate entities. For
instance:
Father(x, y)∧Father(y, z) =⇒Grandfather(x, z) (11)
Horn clauses are ideal for multi-hop reasoning, where each hop corresponds to a literal
in the rule body, however, the intermediate entityymust exist for the rule to trigger.
The symbolic module implements 47 Horn clause rules covering five categories
of kinship inference.Transitivity rulesderive the same relation type by chain-
ing two instances of it (e.g., Brother(x, y)∧Brother(y, z) =⇒Brother(x, z)),
capturing the reflexive-transitive closure of sibling and cousin relations.Composi-
tion rulesderive a new relation type by chaining two different relation types (e.g.,
Father(x, y)∧Father(y, z) =⇒Grandfather(x, z)), capturing multi-generational
relations.Inverse rulesderive the converse of a relation (e.g., Father(x, y) =⇒
Child(y, x)), ensuring that both directions of an asymmetric relation are available in
the knowledge graph.Gender-specific rulesspeciate generic relations into gendered
ones (e.g., Parent(x, y)∧Male(x) =⇒Father(x, y)), handling cases where only the
gender of an individual is explicitly stated.In-law rulesderive affinal (by-marriage)
relations (e.g., Spouse(x, y)∧Brother(y, z) =⇒Brother in law(z, x)), extending the
system to the full relational vocabulary of CLUTRR [5].
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
Algorithm 1Pronoun Coreference Resolution
Require:Ordered list of extractedfacts
Ensure:Each fact with pronouns replaced by their resolved referents
1:procedureResolveCoreference(facts)
2:last entity←null
3:forfactinfactsdo
4:iffact.subjectis a pronounthen
5:iffact.subjectis a first-person pronounthen
6:fact.subject←Speaker
7:else iflast entity̸=nullthen
8:fact.subject←last entity
9:end if
10:end if
11:iffact.objectis a pronounthen
12:iffact.objectis a first-person pronounthen
13:fact.object←Speaker
14:else iflast entity̸=nullthen
15:fact.object←last entity
16:end if
17:end if
18:iffact.subjectisnota pronounthen
19:last entity←fact.subject
20:end if
21:end for
22:returnfacts
23:end procedure
3.2.3 Fact Extraction and Coreference Resolution
Narratives often substitute pronouns for named entities after initial mention, which
presents a serious problem. Desya, for instance, is my grandfather. Thus, “Nirmala is
herdaughter” refers to Desya usingher. The parser extracts Daughter(Nirmala,her)
in the absence of resolution, which is unable to take part in forward chaining. This
is addressed by Algorithm 1, which keeps track of the most recently stated entity
in alast entityvariable. Subject or object position pronouns are substituted with
last entity, or first-person pronouns such as “my” or “I” are substituted withSpeaker.
For CLUTRR, where pronouns almost always relate to the most recent character
introduced, this recency-first heuristic works very well.
3.2.4 Forward Chaining Inference
Forward chaining engine repeatedly applies rules over the knowledge graph Until the
desired relation is discovered or the graph becomes saturated. Unlike backward chain-
ing, forward chaining computes the entire relational closure up front, this is required
because intermediate relations in arbitrary-depth chains are unknown beforehand.
Every ruleR∈ R(rule set) is attempted by Algorithm 2 against substitutionsθ
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
Algorithm 2Saturation-Based Forward Chaining Inference
Require:Initial fact setF 0, target query (s, o,?), rule setR, maximum iterations
Nmax
Ensure:Inferred relationr, orUnknownif not derivable
1:procedureForwardChain(F 0, s, o,R, N max)
2:F←F 0
3:iter←0
4:whileiter< N max do
5:F new ← ∅
6:foreach ruleR∈ Rdo
7:foreach substitutionθsuch thatR.body[θ]⊆Fdo
8:d←R.head[θ]
9:ifd /∈Fthen
10:F new ←F new ∪ {d}
11:end if
12:end for
13:end for
14:ifF new =∅then▷Saturation: no new facts derivable
15:break
16:end if
17:F←F∪F new
18:foreach factf∈Fdo
19:iff.subj=sandf.obj=othen
20:returnf.relation
21:else iff.subj=oandf.obj=sthen
22:returnInverse(f.relation)
23:end if
24:end for
25:iter←iter+ 1
26:end while
27:returnUnknown
28:end procedure
satisfying its body literals; acceptable replacements add head literals toF new, and
termination happens whenF new =∅. Every iteration returns the relation type or
its inverse in accordance with the target query (s, o). Table 4 confirms that this
depth-invariant behavior produces the same accuracy on 7-hop and 2-hop chains.
3.2.5 Specificity-based Ranking
In some inputs, forward chaining derives multiple facts that are all valid answers to
the target query; however, they differ in their level of specificity. For example, both
Brother(Luke,Ben) and Sibling(Luke,Ben) may be derived, however, the CLUTRR
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
ground-truth always uses the most specific applicable label. To align with this annota-
tion convention, a specificity score spec(r) is defined for each relation type, reflecting
its depth in the kinship hierarchy:
spec(r) =



10 father, mother, son, daughter
8 brother, sister
5 uncle, aunt, nephew, niece
3 grandfather, grandmother
1 parent, child, sibling
(12)
The result with the highest specificity is returned when there are several valid
answers. Scores are ranked as follows: direct parent-child (10), sibling (8), extended
family (5), multigenerational (3), and generic labels (1). This means that, for instance,
“brother” is chosen over “sibling” and “grandfather” over “ancestor”.
3.2.6 Symbolic Module Implementation
The symbolic module has no external logic dependencies and is a pure Python FOL
engine. To reduce ambiguous matches, the 25 regex patterns are compiled at initializa-
tion using Python’sremodule and applied in priority order, with specific constructs
coming before general ones.
Listing 1Example Regex Patterns for Fact Extraction
# Pattern f o r ”X i s t h e Y o f Z”
r ” ( [\w\s ]+?)\s+i s\s+the\s+( brother|s i s t e r|. . . )
  \s+of\s +([\w\s ] + ? ) ( ? :\.|$) ”
# Pattern f o r ”X i s my Y”
r ” ( [\w\s ]+?)\s+i s\s+ my\s+( f a t h e r|mother|. . . )
  ( ? :\.|$) ”
# Pattern f o r ”X and Y are b r o t h e r s ”
r ” ( [\w\s ]+?)\s+and\s +([\w\s ]+?)\s+are\s+brothers ”
The parser is controlled by three design choices: sentence boundary detection via
[\w\s]+?stops facts from absorbing words from adjacent sentences; multi-word entity
support via[\w\s]+?handles proper names like “King Henry VIII”; and non-greedy
matching (+?) guarantees that each pattern captures exactly one relational fact.
In order to facilitate O(1) rule lookup during forward chaining, the 47 Horn
clause rules are stored as Python dictionaries that map antecedent tuples to conse-
quent strings. Before inference starts, extracted facts go through coreference resolution
(Algorithm 1), and ties between several legitimate derivations are resolved using a
static specificity dictionary.
3.3 Hybrid Orchestration
The orchestrator applies symbolic priority: the FOL engine’s output is always pre-
ferred; the neural module activates only on symbolic failure. In Algorithm 3, a
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
Fig. 2Web-based interface featuring a context field for narratives and a query field for relational
questions. The “Execute Logical Reasoning” button invokes the hybrid pipeline combining the BERT
neural module [2] and FOL engine [1], returning a relationship prediction with a proof trace.
successful symbolic result returns with confidence 1.0; otherwise neural confidence
is compared toτ= 0.8—exceeding it yields a high-confidence response, failing it a
low-confidence fallback with uncertainty indicator.
Three regimes are defined by the thresholdτ= 0.8: the low-confidence fallback
(<0.8, indicating uncertainty from infrequent or deep chains); the high-confidence
neural path (≥0.8); and the symbolic path (confidence 1.0, logically coherent). The
confidence score is the only way to communicate prediction reliability.
3.3.1 Hybrid System Implementation
The pipeline operates in three stages. In input processing, a Neural Layer first inter-
prets the context and query before routing to both modules: the narrative undergoes
fact extraction and coreference resolution (Algorithm 1) to produceF0, while narrative
and query are tokenized as[CLS] + story + [SEP] + query + [SEP]for BERT.
In parallel processing, the symbolic module applies 47 Horn clause rules via for-
ward chaining (Algorithm 2) overF 0, while the neural module generates a softmax
distribution over 18 classes.
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
Algorithm 3Confidence-Based Hybrid Answer Selection
Require:Queryq, confidence thresholdτ= 0.8
Ensure:Answeraand associated confidence scorec∈[0,1]
1:procedureHybridSelect(q, τ)
2:S←SymbolicEngine.solve(q)
3:N←NeuralEngine.solve(q)
4:ifS.successthen▷Symbolic path: deterministic, guaranteed consistent
5:return
 
S.answer,1.0

6:else ifN.confidence≥τthen▷Neural path: high-confidence prediction
7:return
 
N.answer, N.confidence

8:else▷Neural fallback: low confidence, best available answer
9:return
 
N.answer, N.confidence

10:end if
11:end procedure
Algorithm 3 selects the final output: a successful symbolic result returns with its
proof trail; otherwise the neural prediction returns with its softmax score and fallback
indicator.
4 Experimental Evaluation
4.1 Dataset and Experimental Setup
4.1.1 CLUTRR Benchmark
A semi-synthetic dataset created especially to assess compositional generalization in
relational reasoning is the CLUTRR (Compositional Language Understanding and
Text-based Relational Reasoning) benchmark [5]. Each example consists of a brief
story (three to six sentences) that describes the familial ties between particular fic-
tional characters. The inquiry that follows asks about the relationship between a
specific pair of individuals whose relationship is never explicitly mentioned in the text.
Consider the following example to see how the benchmark is structured: Apollo is Her-
mes’ father. Apollo’s father is Zeus. Zeus’s father is Cronus. Cronus’s father is Uranus.
Gaia is the mother of Uranus. The question asks, “What is the relationship between
Gaia and Hermes?”The answer is “great-great-grandmother.” This relation is never
mentioned explicitly in the story and can only be inferred by chaining together the
five stated facts through four levels of intermediary reasoning. The primary axis of the
depth-stratified assessment, and the principal indicator of complexity, is this level of
inference, namely the number of relational hops required to connect the queried entity
pair.
The dataset is intentionally constructed so that test inference chains are longer
than those observed during training in order to enforce a strong compositional gener-
alization requirement. A model that has learned the underlying relational principles
will retain consistent accuracy regardless of chain length, while a model that mem-
orizes surface patterns from training data will fail on test chains. All 18 kinship
relationships—from direct parent-child linkages (2-hop resolvable) to distant ancestral
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
T able 2CLUTRR dataset statistics [5]. Test
inference chains (up to 10 hops) exceed the
maximum chain length seen during training, making
it a rigorous benchmark for compositional
generalisation. The 18 distinct relations correspond
to the 18 output classes of the BERT classification
head and the 18 predicates in the FOL engine
Metric Value
Total Training Samples 10,000
Validation Samples 1,500
Test Samples 1,500
Distinct Relations 18
Average Story Length 4.2 sentences
Min Inference Hops 2
Max Inference Hops 10
Vocabulary Size 1,247 unique words
relatives (10-hop resolvable)—are present in both the training and test sets. However,
the narratives, the entity names, and the particular chains through which the kinship
relations must be derived are entirely distinct at test time, ensuring that no surface-
level memorisation of training stories can transfer to test queries. The full dataset
statistics are reported in Table 2.
The dataset consists of 10,000 training, 1,500 validation, and 1,500 test instances,
as indicated in Table 2. The vocabulary of 1,247 unique words is deliberately limited
and controlled to avoid lexical novelty during the exam interfering with the compo-
sitional generalization evaluation. The 18 distinct relation classes define the output
vocabulary of the FOL engine and the output classes of the BERT classification layer,
ensuring that the neural and symbolic modules operate over the same relational ontol-
ogy and that their outputs are directly comparable. The depth-stratified evaluation
presented in Table 4 and Fig. 5 is motivated by the intentional train-test depth mis-
match, where test chains reach up to 10 hops while training chains are shorter. This
feature makes CLUTRR a strict compositional generalization benchmark [5].
4.1.2 Evaluation Metrics
Four complementary metrics are used to assess the three systems: the neural-only
baseline, the symbolic-only system, and the suggested Hybrid Reasoner. Each metric
assesses a distinct facet of reasoning quality: logical consistency measures struc-
tural soundness, Accuracy measures overall correctness, Macro F1 displays per-class
performance balance, and Micro F1 indicates aggregate instance-level accuracy.
Accuracyis the proportion of test instances for which the predicted relation class
exactly matches the ground-truth label. It provides a single high-level measure of
system performance however, it can mask class imbalance effects. Formally, forNtest
instances:
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
Accuracy = Number of correct predictions
N = 1
N
NX
i=1
1[ˆyi =y i] (13)
where ˆyi is the predicted label andy i is the ground-truth label for instancei.
The unweighted arithmetic mean of the per-class F1-scores for each of the eighteen
categories of kinship relations is calledMacro F1. It shows whether improvements
are spread throughout the whole relational hierarchy or focused in high-frequency,
simple classes, by treating each class identically regardless of its frequency in the test
set. This is particularly significant in the CLUTRR domain, where the most diagnos-
tically revealing relations regarding a system’s multi-hop capabilities are uncommon
structurally complicated relations likenephewandniece. Let F1 c denote the F1-score
for classcandC= 18 the total number of classes:
Macro F1 = 1
C
CX
c=1
F1c = 1
C
CX
c=1
2·P c ·R c
Pc +R c
(14)
whereP c andR c are the precision and recall for classcrespectively.
Micro F1is computed by summing the true positives (TP), false positives (FP),
and false negatives (FN) across all 18 classes globally, and then computing a single
precision and recall from those totals. This means every individual prediction instance
is weighted equally regardless of which class it belongs to:
Micro F1 = 2· PC
c=1 TPc
2· PC
c=1 TPc +PC
c=1 FPc +PC
c=1 FNc
(15)
Note that Accuracy and Micro F1 are numerically equivalent when every test
instance has exactly one true label, which is the case here. Consequently, the neural
system’s accuracy of 88.3% and Micro F1 of 0.883 represent the same underlying count
of correctly classified instances, expressed as a percentage and as a ratio respectively.
Strong agreement between these two metrics directly indicates that the class distri-
bution in the test set is roughly balanced and that neither metric is dominated by a
single high-frequency class.
The percentage of predictions that are free from relational contradictions—such as
simultaneously forecasting that A is B’s parent and that B is A’s parent, or predicting
a symmetric link asymmetrically—is known asLogical Consistency. This metric
is particularly helpful in differentiating between statistical and rule-based reasoning:
purely statistical models frequently violate relational constraints under distributional
shift, whereas rule-based inference guarantees consistency by construction [9]. For-
mally, letMbe the number of test instance pairs that mutually constrain one another
in a relational manner:
Logical Consistency = Number of contradiction-free predictions
M ×100% (16)
Accuracy and Logical Consistency are two completely different metrics: accuracy
assesses whether the predicted label matches the ground truth on individual instances,
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
while logical consistency assesses the internal coherence of the entire collection of
predictions across related queries. A system can be logically inconsistent across pairs
of instances even when it is quite accurate on individual instances.
4.1.3 Training and Evaluation Configuration
All experiments were conducted on NVIDIA T4 GPUs using PyTorch 1.12.0 and Hug-
gingFace Transformers 4.20.0. Mixed precision (FP16) training was used throughout
to reduce memory consumption and accelerate computation. Gradient accumulation
over 2 steps and gradient clipping at max norm 1.0 were applied to stabilise training on
long sequences. The AdamW optimiser [15] was configured withβ 1 = 0.9,β 2 = 0.999,
andϵ= 10 −8, with a linear warmup and linear decay schedule and early stopping
(patience of 3 epochs on validation loss). The neural module hyperparameters from
Table 1 apply to both the neural-only and hybrid experiments. The symbolic system
requires no training and is evaluated directly on the test set using the 47 Horn clause
rules and the orchestration thresholdτ= 0.8, which was set during development on
the validation set.
4.2 Quantitative Results
4.2.1 Overall Performance
Table 3 and Fig. 4 present the overall performance of the hybrid system and the
neural-only baseline on the CLUTRR test set [5]. The hybrid system outperforms the
neural-only baseline in all four metrics.
There is an accuracy gain of 6.4 percent, because the hybrid orchestrator routes
formally tractable queries to the deterministic symbolic engine rather than relying on
statistical pattern matching. The neural model must rely on surface-level co-occurrence
patterns, which become increasingly unreliable as reasoning depth increases; the sym-
bolic engine constructs a complete reasoning chain with zero probability of a logically
inconsistent answer.
Micro F1 rises from 0.883 to 0.947, while Macro F1 rises from 0.861 to 0.923.
The high degree of agreement between these two measurements indicates that the
hybrid’s advantages are distributed throughout the whole relational hierarchy rather
than being concentrated in high-frequency, structurally shallow relation classes. Here,
simple classesrefer to the direct parent-child labels—father, mother, son, and daugh-
ter—that are most common in the CLUTRR training data and can be resolved in
a single reasoning hop. The neural model already obtains good F1 scores for these
relations since it is constantly exposed to them during training, leaving little room
for additional improvement. According to Table 5, these classes have the smallest
absolute F1 gains (+0.04–+0.05). In contrast, structurally complex relations such as
nephewandniece(+0.12 each) yield the largest gains, as they require at least three
consecutive compositional steps and are infrequently observed during training.
Most notably, logical consistency rises from 73.2% for the neural baseline to100%
for the hybrid on symbolically tractable queries. A query is deemed symbolically
tractable when all three stages of the symbolic pipeline succeed: (i) the coreference res-
olution procedure (Algorithm 1) correctly substitutes all pronouns with their named
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
T able 3Overall performance on CLUTRR [5]. The hybrid
system outperforms the neural-only baseline across all four
metrics. Logical consistency is measured on symbolically
tractable queries—those where fact extraction, coreference
resolution, and forward chaining all succeed (≈78% of the
test set); neural fallback queries are excluded as they carry
no formal correctness guarantee.
Metric Neural Hybrid
Accuracy 88.3%94.7%
Macro F1 0.8610.923
Micro F1 0.8830.947
Logical Consistency 73.2%100% ∗
∗On symbolically tractable queries only (≈78% of test set):
those for which regex fact extraction, pronoun coreference
resolution, and forward chaining all succeed deterministically.
Queries routed to the neural fallback are excluded.
referents; (ii) the regex-based fact extractor successfully extracts a complete set of
facts from the narrative; and (iii) the saturation-based forward chaining engine (Algo-
rithm 2) derives a deterministic answer before reaching the deductive closure of the
knowledge graph. Approximately 78% of the 1,500-example test set meets all three
conditions. The remaining 22% are routed to the neural fallback. The 100% logical
consistency figure on tractable queries is a structural guarantee that results directly
from the hard symbolic-priority rule in Algorithm 3: whenever the FOL engine pro-
duces a result, that result is returned unconditionally, making it impossible for the
system to produce a prediction that contradicts the extracted facts or violates any of
the 47 Horn clause rules [1, 9].
4.2.2 Performance by Inference Depth
In Table 4 and Fig. 5, accuracy is shown as a function of inference chain length, the
primary evaluation dimension on CLUTRR. In line with the compositional general-
ization failures documented by Lake and Baroni [6] and Marcus [7], the neural-only
model declines sharply from 95.2% at 2 hops to 62.1% at more than 7 hops—a reduc-
tion of 33.1 percent. Neural models learn to match surface patterns in training data; as
chain length rises, the surface patterns become progressively different from anything
seen during training, leading to a collapse in prediction confidence. This deterioration
is a reflection of a fundamental architectural restriction.
The Horn-clause engine avoids this issue: both the symbolic-only and hybrid sys-
tems stay almost flat across all depths [1] because each inference step applies the
same deterministic rule regardless of how many steps came before it. The hybrid
achieves the highest accuracy at shallow depths (98.9% at 2 hops), where neural recall
and symbolic precision complement each other most strongly. In more than 7 hops
the symbolic-only system leads by 0.8 percent (93.2% vs. 92.4%), because the neural
fallback occasionally introduces inconsistencies on structurally difficult long chains.
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
T able 4Accuracy by inference depth on
CLUTRR [5]. The neural-only model degrades sharply
with hop count [6], while symbolic and hybrid systems
maintain near-constant accuracy, reflecting
depth-invariant Horn-clause inference [1]. Bold values
indicate the best result at each depth.
Hops Neural Only Symbolic Only Hybrid
2 95.2% 98.1%98.9%
3 91.7% 97.3%97.8%
4 84.3% 96.8%96.2%
5 76.8% 95.9%95.1%
6 68.2% 94.7%93.8%
7+ 62.1%93.2%92.4%
4.2.3 Per-Class Performance
Table 5 and Fig. 6 display the per-class F1-scores for each of the 18 relationship cate-
gories. The degree of improvement from neural to hybrid is directly and monotonically
correlated with the inferential complexity of the relation, indicating a structurally
meaningful pattern. The neural baseline already achieves F1 of 0.94 and 0.93 for father
and mother respectively, because surface-level patterns reliably encode direct parent-
child relationships. The symbolic engine adds only a marginal gain (+0.04 each).
Sibling relations (brother,sister) gain +0.06 because they need a straightforward
one-hop sibling check, which is still manageable for the neural model, while sym-
bolic engine benefits from deterministic guarantees. Extended family relations (uncle,
aunt,nephew,niece) gain +0.10–+0.12, reflecting the fact that these require two or
three intermediate reasoning steps whose sequential structure is difficult for the neu-
ral model to reliably capture, where it is directly encoded in the symbolic rules. The
greatest absolute gains are seen fornephew(+0.12, neural F1: 0.74) andniece(+0.12,
neural F1: 0.73), which require a minimum of three compositional steps (e.g., sibling
→parent→child) and exhibit the highest off-diagonal misclassification rates in the
confusion matrix (Fig. 6).
4.3 Qualitative Analysis
4.3.1 Case Study 1: Deep Inference Chain
Input Story:“Zeus is the father of Hercules. Cronus is the father of Zeus. Uranus is
the father of Cronus.”
Query:“What is Uranus to Hercules?”
Neural Prediction:“grandfather” (Confidence: 0.67), Incorrect
Symbolic Inference(Algorithm 2):
1. Father(Uranus,Cronus) [Direct Extraction]
2. Father(Cronus,Zeus) [Direct Extraction]
3. Father(Zeus,Hercules) [Direct Extraction]
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
Fig. 3Training, validation loss and accuracy over 5 epochs for the BERT-based neural module on
the CLUTRR dataset [5]. Both training loss (blue) and validation loss (orange) decrease steadily
and converge closely across all 5 epochs, indicating that the model generalises well without overfit-
ting. Validation accuracy stabilises above 88% by epoch 5, confirming effective learning of relational
patterns under the hyperparameter configuration in Table 1. The AdamW optimiser [15] with linear
warmup schedule is used throughout.
4. Grandfather(Uranus,Zeus) [Rule: Father + Father]
5. Great Grandfather(Uranus,Hercules) [Rule: Grandfather + Father]
Hybrid Answer:“great-grandfather” (Confidence: 1.0), Correct
Analysis:The neural model, having encountered predominantly 2-3 hop chains
during training, assigns the highest probability to “grandfather”, the most common
multi-generational label in the training distribution. This illustrates the distributional
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
Fig. 4Bar chart comparing overall performance metrics of the neural-only baseline and the hybrid
system on the CLUTRR test set [5]. The most prominent gap is in logical consistency (73.2% vs.
100%), reflecting the formal correctness guarantee provided by the Horn-clause inference engine (Algo-
rithm 2). Accuracy, Macro F1, and Micro F1 show consistent improvements, confirming that the
hybrid’s gains are distributed across all dimensions of reasoning quality
Fig. 5Accuracy as a function of inference depth (number of hops) on the CLUTRR test set [5]
for the neural-only (red), symbolic-only (blue), and hybrid (green) systems. The neural line degrades
sharply from 95.2% at 2 hops to 62.1% at more than 7 hops, consistent with the compositional
failure documented by Lake and Baroni [6]. Both the symbolic and hybrid lines remain nearly flat,
demonstrating the depth-invariant nature of Horn-clause inference [1]. Exact values are listed in
Table 4
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
T able 5F1-scores for each class on the CLUTRR test
set [5]. Relationships requiring more compositional inference
yield the most gains. The hybrid system’s absolute F1
improvement over the neural baseline (Hybrid−Neural) is
shown in the Gain column. Bold values indicate the best
outcome for each class
Relation Neural Symbolic Hybrid Gain
father 0.94 0.960.98+0.04
mother 0.93 0.950.97+0.04
son 0.91 0.940.96+0.05
daughter 0.90 0.930.95+0.05
brother 0.88 0.910.94+0.06
sister 0.87 0.900.93+0.06
grandfather 0.82 0.870.91+0.09
grandmother 0.81 0.860.90+0.09
uncle 0.79 0.840.89+0.10
aunt 0.78 0.830.88+0.10
nephew 0.74 0.800.86+0.12
niece 0.73 0.790.85+0.12
bias documented in Table 4: neural accuracy at more than 7 hops falls to 62.1% pre-
cisely because training-set frequency, not chain depth, governs the model’s predictions.
The symbolic engine, in contrast, correctly applies two composition rules sequentially
across the three extracted facts, producing the correct “great-grandfather” answer
with deterministic confidence.
4.3.2 Case Study 2: Inverse Relationship
Input Story:“Luke is the brother of Leia. Leia is the mother of Ben.”
Query:“What is Ben to Luke?”
Neural Prediction:“uncle” (Confidence: 0.43), Incorrect direction
Symbolic Inference(Algorithm 2):
1. Brother(Luke,Leia) [Direct Extraction]
2. Mother(Leia,Ben) [Direct Extraction]
3. Uncle(Luke,Ben) [Rule: Brother + Mother]
4. Query asks for relation from Ben to Luke
5. Nephew(Ben,Luke) [Inverse Rule applied]
Hybrid Answer:“nephew” (Confidence: 1.0), Correct
Analysis:The neural model correctly identifies that an uncle relation exists
between Luke and Ben, however fails to recognise that the query is asked in the inverse
direction (“what is Ben to Luke” rather than “what is Luke to Ben”). This direction-
confusion error is a specific manifestation of the logical inconsistency documented by
Ribeiro et al. [9]: the neural model encodes “Luke-uncle-Ben” as a high-probability
pattern without representing the asymmetry of the uncle relation. The symbolic engine
23

--- PAGE 24 ---
Fig. 6Confusion matrix for the Hybrid Reasoner kinship classifier on the CLUTRR test set [5] across
all 18 relationship types. Rows represent true relationship classes and columns represent predicted
classes. Darker diagonal cells indicate higher per-class accuracy. Off-diagonal entries reveal common
misclassification patterns: notably, “uncle” and “aunt” show the highest confusion rates due to their
structural similarity in multi-hop chains (both require two intermediate steps), consistent with the
lower per-class F1-scores for these relations reported in Table 5
handles this correctly via an explicit inverse rule: once Uncle(Luke,Ben) is derived,
the inverse rule immediately fires to produce Nephew(Ben,Luke).
4.3.3 Case Study 3: Pronoun Resolution
Input Story:“Desya is my grandfather. So Nirmala is her daughter.”
Query:“How I’m related to her?”
Parsing(Algorithm 1):
1. “Desya is my grandfather”→Grandfather(Desya,Speaker)
2. “Nirmala is her daughter”→Daughter(Nirmala,Desya) [herresolved to Desya,
the last named entity, via Algorithm 1]
3. Query: Relation fromSpeakerto “her” (= Nirmala via coreference to the most
recently mentioned named entity)
Neural Model Output:“daughter” (Confidence: 0.31), Incorrect.
Without coreference resolution, the pronounherremains unresolved. The neural
24

--- PAGE 25 ---
model cannot ground the query entity and falls back to a surface-level pattern match,
producing an incorrect low-confidence prediction.
Symbolic Inference(Algorithm 2):
1. Grandfather(Desya,Speaker) implies Parent(P,Speaker) and Father(Desya, P)
2. Daughter(Nirmala,Desya) implies Father(Desya,Nirmala), thereforeP= Nirmala
3. Parent(Nirmala,Speaker) and Female(Nirmala) implies
Mother(Nirmala,Speaker)
Symbolic Output:“mother” (Confidence: 1.0), Correct.
With coreference resolution active (Algorithm 1), the pronounheris resolved to Desya,
yielding a fully grounded fact base. The Horn-clause engine then derives the answer
deterministically in three steps.
Hybrid Answer:“mother” (Confidence: 1.0), Correct
Analysis:This case demonstrates the critical role of coreference resolution (Algo-
rithm 1). Without it, the parser produces the unresolved fact Daughter(Nirmala,her),
which cannot participate in forward chaining, causing the symbolic engine to fail
and triggering a neural fallback that predicts “daughter” with low confidence (0.31).
With coreference resolution active, the full reasoning chain is recovered and the cor-
rect answer is derived deterministically. The quantitative impact of this component is
confirmed in Table 6: disabling coreference resolution reduces overall accuracy by 7.4
percent.
4.3.4 Case Study 4: Seven-Hop Reasoning Chain
Input Story:
“Apollo is the father of Hermes. Zeus is the father of Apollo. Cronus is the father of Zeus.
Uranus is the father of Cronus. Gaia is the mother of Uranus. Rhea is the mother of Zeus.
Metis is the mother of Apollo.”
Query:“What is Gaia to Hermes?”
Neural Prediction:“great-grandmother” (Confidence: 0.58), Incorrect
Symbolic Inference Steps (7-Hop Chain, Algorithm 2):
1. Father(Apollo,Hermes) [Direct]
2. Father(Zeus,Apollo) [Direct]
3. Father(Cronus,Zeus) [Direct]
4. Father(Uranus,Cronus) [Direct]
5. Mother(Gaia,Uranus) [Direct]
6. Grandfather(Uranus,Zeus) [Father + Father]
7. Great Grandfather(Uranus,Apollo) [Grandfather + Father]
8. Great Great Grandfather(Uranus,Hermes) [Composition Rule]
9. Great Great Grandmother(Gaia,Hermes) [Mother + Composition Rule]
Hybrid Answer:“great-great-grandmother” (Confidence: 1.0), Correct
Analysis:This seven-hop chain traces the path Gaia→Uranus→Cronus→
Zeus→Apollo→Hermes through five intermediate entities. The neural model’s
prediction of “great-grandmother” reflects the well-documented accuracy collapse at
25

--- PAGE 26 ---
T able 6Impact of coreference resolution
(Algorithm 1) on the hybrid system, evaluated on
the CLUTRR test set [5]
Configuration Accuracy F1-Score
Without Coreference 87.3% 0.851
With Coreference94.7% 0.923
more than 7 hops (Table 4: 62.1%): the training distribution contains few examples
of 7-hop chains, so the model defaults to the shallower pattern that dominates the
training set. The symbolic module’s saturation-based forward chaining applies each
composition rule in sequence, mechanically expanding the knowledge graph until the
target relation is found. The depth-invariant character of this process and identical
algorithmic behaviour regardless of chain length—is precisely what distinguishes the
symbolic approach from statistical pattern matching.
4.4 Ablation Studies
4.4.1 Impact of Coreference Resolution
Table 6 presents a controlled comparison of the hybrid system with and without the
coreference resolution preprocessing step (Algorithm 1). When coreference resolution
is disabled, all pronouns in extracted facts are left as raw pronoun tokens (e.g.,her,my,
him) rather than being substituted with their named referents. This causes the sym-
bolic parser to fail on any sentence that uses pronouns to refer to previously introduced
entities, a common pattern in CLUTRR narratives. When the parser fails to extract
a complete fact chain, the orchestrator falls back to the neural module, which incurs
the 73.2% logical consistency penalty. Enabling coreference resolution restores these
linkages, allowing the symbolic engine to construct complete knowledge graphs and
perform deterministic forward chaining. The impact is substantial: accuracy improves
from 87.3% to 94.7% (+7.4 pp) and F1-score from 0.851 to 0.923 (+0.072), confirm-
ing that pronoun resolution is a critical architectural requirement for any symbolic
system operating over natural language input.
4.4.2 Impact of Specificity Ranking
Table 7 compares two answer selection strategies for cases where the forward chaining
engine derives multiple valid facts that all match the target query. Thefirst-match
strategy returns the first matching fact encountered during forward chaining, with
no preference between specific and generic relation labels. This fails when both
Brother(Luke,Ben) and Sibling(Luke,Ben) are derived, because the ground-truth
annotation always uses the most specific label, and first-match may return the generic
“sibling” label depending on rule firing order. Thespecificity rankingstrategy avoids
this by scoring all valid derived facts by the specificity hierarchy defined in Section 3.2
and returning the highest-scoring one. Specificity ranking improves accuracy from
91.2% to 94.7% (+3.5 pp) and F1 from 0.892 to 0.923 (+0.031).
26

--- PAGE 27 ---
T able 7Impact of specificity ranking on the
hybrid system, evaluated on the CLUTRR test
set [5]
Configuration Accuracy F1-Score
First Match 91.2% 0.892
Specificity Ranking94.7% 0.923
5 Discussion
5.1 Behaviour of the Symbolic Model
The symbolic module consistently exhibits depth-invariant accuracy across all infer-
ence chain lengths (Table 4, Fig. 5). Performance does not decline as the number
of hops increases since each inference step is controlled by a deterministic Horn-
clause rule [1] rather than a learned statistical correlation. In contrast to the neural
model’s 33.1 percent collapse, the symbolic module achieves 98.1% accuracy on 2-hop
chains and retains 93.2% accuracy at more than 7 hops—a loss of just 4.9 percent.
The module’s primary failure mechanism is parser failure: when the natural language
input contains syntactic structures not covered by the 25 regex patterns, no facts are
extracted, the knowledge graph stays empty, and the module returnsUnknown. This
brittleness at the perception stage is the defining drawback of the purely symbolic
approach and the main driving force for the hybrid design.
5.2 Strengths of the Hybrid Approach
The experimental results in Tables 3–7 and Figs. 4–5 show that combining neural
and symbolic components yields capabilities that neither paradigm achieves alone.
Assigning all multi-hop inference to the deterministic symbolic module preserves com-
positional generalization, while the neural fallback provides linguistic resilience when
the parser fails. The hard symbolic-priority rule in Algorithm 3 provides a structural
guarantee of 100% logical consistency on symbolically tractable queries; this is not a
statistical average that may deteriorate under distributional shift [9]. For each sym-
bolically resolved inquiry, the system produces human-readable proof traces, offering
the step-by-step auditability that the interpretability literature recognizes as crucial
for AI deployment in high-stakes domains [8]. The 47 Horn clause rules encapsulate
compositional knowledge that generalizes to arbitrary chain depths without requiring
a single training example of those depths [1, 10], offering an additional level of sample
efficiency unmatched by purely statistical techniques.
5.3 Limitations and Challenges
The most important drawback is the brittleness of the regex-based fact extractor:
sentences that use constructions not covered by the 25 defined patterns force the
system to rely on the neural module, resulting in a quantifiable accuracy cost of 7.4
percent (Table 6) and the loss of the logical consistency guarantee for those queries.
27

--- PAGE 28 ---
The present 47 rules fully encode the CLUTRR kinship ontology, however they cannot
be easily expanded to additional domains without skilled knowledge engineering. The
scalability of forward chaining (Algorithm 2) is also a real consideration for deployment
at scale, since the number of rule firings per iteration increases quadratically with the
size of the fact set. Finally, the heuristic coreference resolution (Algorithm 1) fails when
dealing with complicated discourse structures involving several concurrent referential
chains or long-distance anaphora.
5.4 Comparison with Related Work
On the CLUTRR benchmark [5], the hybrid system performs noticeably better than
end-to-end neural approaches: neural models drop from 95% at 2-hop chains to 62% at
more than 7 hops, while the suggested system maintains 92.4% at the same depth, con-
sistent with the compositional generalization failures reported by Marcus [7] and Lake
and Baroni [6]. Compared to NTPs [11], the suggested method sacrifices end-to-end
differentiability in favor of interpretability and computational efficiency. Differentiable
methods like DeepProbLog [12] or LTNs [14] relax logical constraints into continuous
functions that allow mild violations, and therefore cannot achieve the 100% logical
consistency of the suggested system (Table 3). In domains such as medical genealogy,
legal kinship adjudication, and automated verification, where logical precision and
explainability are crucial, this trade-off is acceptable [8, 9].
6 Conclusion and Future Work
This study examined multi-hop reasoning in neural, symbolic, and hybrid models
using the CLUTRR benchmark [5]. By treating a refined BERT encoder [2] as a nat-
ural language perception module and allocating systematic multi-hop inference to a
deterministic Horn-clause engine [1] operating over a structured knowledge graph, the
proposed Hybrid Reasoner shows that high accuracy and guaranteed logical consis-
tency are simultaneously achievable. The three main conclusions are: neural models
show significant accuracy degradation with increasing inference depth (from 95.2% at
2 hops to 62.1% at more than 7 hops); symbolic reasoning maintains nearly constant
accuracy regardless of depth (93.2%–98.1%) however, it requires structured input; and
the hybrid approach achieves the best overall performance (94.7% accuracy and 100%
logical consistency on symbolically tractable queries).
The most important short-term improvement would be the integration of ILP [1,
13] to automatically learn Horn clause rules from annotated relational data—replacing
the manually generated rule library with rules induced directly from examples. This
would remove the fundamental scalability barrier of the current design and eliminate
the need for expert knowledge engineering when expanding to other relational domains.
Replacing the regex-based fact extractor with a neural semantic parser trained on
structured supervision would address the 7.4 percent accuracy penalty from parser
failures, handling a far larger range of linguistic constructions while maintaining the
deterministic nature of downstream symbolic inference.
Two additional improvements would expand the system’s reasoning capacity.
Adding temporal linkages and event sequencing to the knowledge graph would enable
28

--- PAGE 29 ---
applications such as clinical timeline analysis and legal event ordering, where the
arrangement of facts is just as crucial as their substance. Including probabilistic logic
programming [12] as a systematic framework for treating uncertainty would enable
robust reasoning over contradictory or inadequate evidence, supplementing the current
emphasis on deterministic accuracy with a calibrated treatment of ambiguity. Extend-
ing Hybrid Reasoner to multi-modal inputs—integrating textual narratives with visual
scene graphs, structured databases, or medical imaging data—via a modular percep-
tion front-end that extracts structured facts from non-textual modalities and feeds
them into the current symbolic inference engine would greatly expand the system’s
applicability to richer information sources.
Declarations
No funding was received for conducting this study.
The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content
of this article.
All authors contributed equally to the conception and design of this work. The method-
ology, software development, and formal analysis were carried out collectively by
all authors. The original draft was prepared jointly, and all authors participated in
reviewing and editing subsequent versions. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
The CLUTRR benchmark dataset used in this study is publicly available at https:
//github.com/facebookresearch/clutrr [5]. No additional datasets were generated or
analysed during this study.
References
[1] Muggleton S, De Raedt L (1994) Inductive logic programming: Theory and
methods. Journal of Logic Programming 19-20:629-679
[2] Devlin J, Chang MW, Lee K, Toutanova K (2019) BERT: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In: Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (NAACL-HLT), pp 4171-4186
[3] Scarselli F, Gori M, Tsoi AC, Hagenbuchner M, Monfardini G (2009) The graph
neural network model. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 20(1):61-80
[4] Santoro A et al (2017) A simple neural network module for relational reasoning.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol 30, pp
4967-4976
[5] Sinha K, Sodhani S, Dong J, Pineau J, Hamilton WL (2019) CLUTRR: A
diagnostic benchmark for inductive reasoning from text. In: Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
29

--- PAGE 30 ---
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp 4506-4515
[6] Lake BM, Baroni M (2018) Generalization without systematicity: On the compo-
sitional skills of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. In: Proceedings of the
35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp 2879-2888
[7] Marcus G (2018) Deep learning: A critical appraisal. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.00631
[8] Lipton ZC (2018) The mythos of model interpretability. Communications of the
ACM 61(10):36-43
[9] Ribeiro MT, Singh S, Guestrin C (2016) “Why should I trust you?”: Explain-
ing the predictions of any classifier. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp 1135-1144
[10] Towell GG, Shavlik JW (1994) Knowledge-based artificial neural networks.
Artificial Intelligence 70(1-2):119-165
[11] Rockt¨ aschel T, Riedel S (2017) End-to-end differentiable proving. In: Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol 30, pp 3788-3800
[12] Manhaeve R, Dumanˇ ci´ c S, Kimmig A, Demeester T, De Raedt L (2018)
DeepProbLog: Neural probabilistic logic programming. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol 31, pp 3749-3759
[13] Evans R, Grefenstette E (2018) Learning explanatory rules from noisy data.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 61:1-64
[14] Serafini L, d’Avila Garcez A (2016) Logic tensor networks: Deep learning and
logical reasoning from data and knowledge. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on
Neural-Symbolic Learning and Reasoning (NeSy)
[15] Loshchilov I, Hutter F (2019) Decoupled weight decay regularization. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 7th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)
[16] Zeng L, Liu Y, Han G, Zu-Guo Y, Liu Y (2025) ProGraphTrans: Multi-
modal dynamic collaborative framework for protein representation learning. BMC
Biology 23:1-15
[17] Shui Y, Ge X, Cao C, Wang J, Hu J, Liu Y (2025) BiMA-DTI: A bidirec-
tional Mamba-Attention hybrid framework for enhanced drug-target interaction
prediction. BMC Biology 23:1-20
[18] Ren J, Tang T, Jia H, Xu Z, Fayek H, Li X, Ma S, Xu X, Xia F (2025) Foundation
models for anomaly detection: Vision and challenges. AI Magazine 46(4)
30

